Abstract

Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorders, and affects around 50 million people worldwide. Epilepsy is mainly diagnosed with the use of electroencephalograms (EEG), which requires extensive analysis by trained professionals due to its susceptibility to noise and brain activity variance between patients. While significant progress has been made in the field of automated EEG analysis, proposed methods have yet to be widely used in actual medical settings. In addition, many machine learning-based methods require labeled data, which can be hard to obtain and may not be representative of all patients. As such, accurate unsupervised methods for artifact removal and seizure detection, two major aspects of EEG analysis for epilepsy, are of particular importance. This project presents a novel unsupervised learning pipeline applied to the CHB-MIT Scalp EEG database to achieve this goal. A variational autoencoder (VAE) is used to generate low-dimensional embeddings of EEG data that can be clustered to detect and subsequently remove abnormal activity. The recently proposed liquid time-constant network (LTC) is trained to model the artifact-free data, and due to the high proportion of normal brain activity as compared to seizure activity, the network will tend to model normal brain activity more accurately. As such, the data can be passed into the network in real time, and a large variance between the model’s prediction and the actual data is indicative of seizure activity.
